
CPU Specifications


    The Chip 8 has 35 opcodes which are all two bytes long. To store the current opcode, we need a data type that allows us to store two bytes. An unsigned short has the length of two bytes and therefor fits our needs:

    unsigned short opcode;

    The Chip 8 has 4K memory in total, which we can emulated as:

    unsigned char memory[4096];

    CPU registers: The Chip 8 has 15 8-bit general purpose registers named V0,V1 up to VE. The 16th register is used for the ‘carry flag’. Eight bits is one byte so we can use an unsigned char for this purpose:

    unsigned char V[16];

    There is an Index register I and a program counter (pc) which can have a value from 0x000 to 0xFFF

    unsigned short I;
    unsigned short pc;

    The systems memory map:

    0x000-0x1FF - Chip 8 interpreter (contains font set in emu)
    0x050-0x0A0 - Used for the built in 4x5 pixel font set (0-F)
    0x200-0xFFF - Program ROM and work RAM

    The graphics system: The chip 8 has one instruction that draws sprite to the screen. Drawing is done in XOR mode and if a pixel is turned off as a result of drawing, the VF register is set. This is used for collision detection.
    The graphics of the Chip 8 are black and white and the screen has a total of 2048 pixels (64 x 32). This can easily be implemented using an array that hold the pixel state (1 or 0):

    unsigned char gfx[64 * 32];

    Interupts and hardware registers. The Chip 8 has none, but there are two timer registers that count at 60 Hz. When set above zero they will count down to zero.

    unsigned char delay_timer;
    unsigned char sound_timer;

    The system’s buzzer sounds whenever the sound timer reaches zero.

It is important to know that the Chip 8 instruction set has opcodes that allow the program to jump to a certain address or call a subroutine. While the specification doesn’t mention a stack, you will need to implement one as part of the interpreter yourself. The stack is used to remember the current location before a jump is performed. So anytime you perform a jump or call a subroutine, store the program counter in the stack before proceeding. The system has 16 levels of stack and in order to remember which level of the stack is used, you need to implement a stack pointer (sp).

unsigned short stack[16];
unsigned short sp;

Finally, the Chip 8 has a HEX based keypad (0x0-0xF), you can use an array to store the current state of the key.

unsigned char key[16];



Fetch
Read the instruction that PC is currently pointing at from memory. An instruction is two bytes, so you will need to read two successive bytes from memory and combine them into one 16-bit instruction.
You should then immediately increment the PC by 2, to be ready to fetch the next opcode. Some people do this during the “execute” stage, since some instructions will increment it by 2 more to skip an instruction, but in my opinion that’s very error-prone. Code duplication is a bad thing. If you forget to increment it in one of the instructions, you’ll have problems. Do it here!